+++
title = "About me"
[params]
math = true
+++

## Whoami

Hello! I'm a software engineer from Poland. I am interested in topics related to distributed systems, functional
programming and low-level tools for profiling Unix systems, particularly tools based on [eBPF technology](
https://ebpf.io/).

I am heavy linux user since 2013. Currently I am using [Arch Linux](https://archlinux.org/) distribution (but glorying
this particular distro gives me cringe). I use x86 Tuxedo's PC and I highly
recommend [Tuxedo manufacture](https://www.tuxedocomputers.com/en).

However, I have not always been involved in software engineering – my formal education is an MSc in theoretical
mathematics (aka pure mathematics). In the world of the queen of sciences, my interests focused on modern algebraic
geometry.

{{< details summary="**Click here to read more about my mathematical interests**">}}

### Geometric Group Theory

My MSc thesis was in [geometric group theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometric_group_theory). Together with my
advisor we introduced *disjoint sum norm* and *disjoint sum metric* for any group \(G\). We related the boundedness of
this metric to boundedness of Burnside's groups in any bi-invariant word metric.

**Construction of metric**. Recall that for general two groups \(G, H\) their *wreath product* is defined to be the
semidirect product \[H \wr G := (\bigoplus_G H) \rtimes_\phi G\]

where \(\phi: G \rightarrow \text{Aut}(\bigoplus_G H)\) is given by translation action i.e. \(\phi(g)(\sigma)(
\overline{g}) := \sigma(g^{-1}\overline{g})\). We simply write \(g \cdot \sigma\) instead of \(\phi(g)(\sigma)\). In our
case \(H\) is always specialized to be \(\mathbb{Z}_2\) and we write \(\sigma = \delta_{g_1} + \dots + \delta_{g_k}\).

Suppose \(G\) is generated by set \(S\) and consider \(G\) embedded in \(\mathbb{Z}_2 \wr G\) by \(g \mapsto (0,g)\).
Put \(S_1 := S \cup \{(\delta_e,e)\}\), where \(\delta_e\) is the Dirac's delta on identity element in \(G\).
Straighforward argument shows that \(\langle S_1 \rangle = \mathbb{Z_2} \wr G\). Now, let us consider \[\overline{S_1}
:= \bigcup_{x \in \mathbb{Z}_2 \wr G} xsx^{-1} \] Careful observation on how elements \(\overline{s} \in
\overline{S_1}\) look like motivated us to consider subset \[T := \{ \sigma + g \cdot \sigma | \sigma \in \bigoplus_G
\mathbb{Z}_2, g \in G \} \cup \{\delta_e\} \]

Note that since \(\delta_e + (\delta_g + g^{-1} \cdot \delta_g) = \delta_g\), it follows \(T\) generates \(\bigoplus_G
\mathbb{Z}_2\).

**Definition**. Let \(G\) be a group and \(T\) a generating subset of \(\bigoplus_G \mathbb{Z}_2\) as described above.
The disjoint sum norm is defined to be \[|-|_{\text{DS}} := |-|_T\]

Below I present our main result.

Recall that **Burnside group** on \(n\) generators and exponent \(d\) is defined to be:

\[ B(n,d) := \langle x_1, \dots x_n | \omega^d=1 \rangle_{\omega \in (S \cup S^{-1})^*} \]

These groups are utterly mysterious and interesting for mathematicians, we know not to much about them. It is even hard
to predict whether such a group is non-trivial, since we're basically killing each word of length \(d\). Nevertheless,
there are interesting combinatorial results showing a bunch of such a group are infinite! There is well known
_Burnside problem_ which asks for which positive integers \(m,n\) is the Burnside group \(B(m,n)\) finite?

The full solution to this problem is not known. For example \(B(m,3), B(m, 4)\) and \(B(m,6)\) are all finite for
all \(m\) but particular case \(B(2,5)\) remains open.

**Theorem 2.** For *any* bi-invariant word metric \(|-|\) on the Burnside group \(B(n+1,2d)\) there is inequality
\[\frac{1}{2} \text{diam}\left(\bigoplus_{B(n,d)} \mathbb{Z}_2,|-|_{\text{DS}}\right) \leq \text{diam}(B(n+1,2d),|-|)\]

Unfortunately we were not able to compute the left-hand side of this inequality in terms of parameters. But it is
interesting we found one metric which is dominated by every bi-invariant word metric. Of course it may happen that this
result trivializes (that is why we didn't publish it).

### Algebraic Geometry

During my PhD studies (which I interrupted and switched into industry) I studied equivariant cohomology classes of
singular algebraic varieties. I'll just shortly give a glimpse of definitions and fundamental *localization theorem*. I
take these notes below from the talk of my advisor: https://www.mimuw.edu.pl/~aweber/ps/hftalk2.pdf

**Definition**. Suppose topological group \(G\) acts on topological space \(X\) and let \(\Lambda\) be ring (of
coefficients). The *equivariant cohomology ring of this action* is defined to be: \[H^*_G(X;\Lambda) := H^*(EG \times_G
X; \Lambda) \]

Of course the functor \(H^*(-;-)\) is an [ordinary cohomology functor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cohomology_ring)
which I'll not define here.

**Remark 1.** If \(G\) is trivial group, this is ordinary cohomology ring.

**Remark 2.** If \(X\) is contractible, it reduces to the ring
of [classifying space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classifying_space) \(BG\).

**Remark 3.** If \(G\) acts freely on \(X\), then canonical map \(EG \times_G X \rightarrow X/G\) is a homotopy
equivalence, and in consequence \[H^*_G(X;\Lambda) \cong H^*(X/G;\Lambda)\]

Assume that \(T = (\mathbb{C}^*)^n\) acts on a compact space \(M\). Then, equivariant cohomology \(H^*_T(M)\) is a
module over equivariant cohomology ring of the point \[H^*_T(pt) = \mathbb{Q}[t_1,\dots,t_n]\]

There is important

**Theorem [Borel].** The restriction to the fixed set \(M^T\) of the action: \[\iota^*: H^*_T(M)
\rightarrow H^*_T(M^T)\] becomes isomorphism after localization in the multiplicative set generated by the nontrivial
characters \[S = T^{\lor}-0 \subseteq H^2_T(pt)\]

The case when this fixed points set is finite is of particular interest, since it allows us to quite easily glue local
cohomological information to the whole information. To sketch what I mean by that, consider push-forward functor \[p_* =:
\int_M : H^*_T(M) \rightarrow H^{*-2 dim(M)}(pt)\] where \(p: M \rightarrow pt\) is collapse map.

**Theorem [Berline-Vergne].** For \(\alpha \in H^
*_T(M)\) the integral can by computed by summation: \[\int_M \alpha = \sum_{ \text{components } F \text{ of} M^T} \int_F
\frac{\alpha|_F}{e_F} \] where of course \(e_F\) is [Euler class](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler_class) of \(F\).
Now, if \(M^T=\{p_0,p_1,\dots,p_n\} \), then the Euler class is product of weights \[e_p=\prod_{\lambda \in \Lambda}
\lambda^{\text{dim}(V_\lambda)} \in H^*_T(p) \subseteq \mathbb{Q}[t_1,\dots,t_n] \]

provided that \(T_pM=\bigoplus_{\lambda \in \Lambda} V_\lambda\). The integral along \(M\) is equal to the sum of
fractions: \[\int_M \alpha = \sum_{p \in M^T} \frac{\alpha|_p}{e_p} \]

Here, I should explain some implicit identifications. For a torus action \(G=T\), we identify \(H^*_T(pt)\) with
polynomial algebra spanned by characters of \(T\): \[H^*_T(pt)=\mathbb{Q}[T^{\vee}]=\bigoplus_
{k=0}^\infty [T^{\vee} \otimes \mathbb{Q}] \]

A character \(\lambda: T \rightarrow \mathbb{C}^*\) corresponds to an element of \(H^2_T(pt)\).

**Exercise.** Apply Berline-Vergne theorem to prove: \[\sum_{k=0}^n {n \choose k} (-1)^{m+k}k^m = \begin{cases} 0, &
\text{for } m < n, \\ n!, & \text{for } m = n. \end{cases} \]

Here is my joint work together with my PhD advisor, [published](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0021869322000527) in *Journal of Algebra*.
We applied localization theorem to compute interesting equivariant classes of Borel orbits of square-zero upper
triangular matrices.

{{< /details >}}

## Open Source Work

I'm an open source enthusiast, and I try to contribute to OS projects. Click [here](/opensource) to see my
contributions.

## What is this blog about?

My goal is to publish posts mainly on the subject of building distributed systems and anything else that I find
interesting at any given moment — I assume that my readers have a moderately high level of computer science culture.

## Whoami --no-tech

In addition to everything I mentioned above, I am interested in Christian apologetics – the thoughts of the Church
Fathers and, above all, the view/explanation of other religions from the perspective of Christian theology. I probably
won't discuss this topic on this blog, but I have a few thoughts that, who knows? May be published one sunny day.

Another topic that takes up my time is learning jazz and playing the piano. I will almost certainly not publish anything
on these matters. Anyway I recommend you to check out [lilypond](https://lilypond.org/) - a free and open source
software for creating music, ideal for [LaTeX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LaTeX) users.

## The aim of this blog

The goal of this blog will be achieved when at least one real, living and non-AI person benefits from it or become
inspired by materials found here. I have noticed that, paradoxically, although we live in an age of enormous information
noise (further amplified by AI), it is challenging to find posts on the use of advanced topics. Most developers do not
have the time or simply do not want to publish their thoughts, which is totally understandable as we are all limited by
time, commitments or other hobbies. I decided to simply add my small contribution to this noise — but in a form free of
advertisements and invitations to yet another mailing list. __My materials are and always will be available for free,
without advertisements and (hopefully) with ~~JavaScript~~ needed only for rendering LaTeX equations.__